# Progression of Unessay Concept

## October 18 

Still unsure what it is that I want to do for my unessay. I do like the idea of using Echoes as a software, but don't know how I want to and how I'm able to create a non-linear historical experience with it. My idea of counter-history of statues and monuments was good in theory, but when looking at maps of Ottawa and walking the streets myself, there isn't a clear path to make it non-linear, which is frustrating.

## October 23 

I thought I had a great idea once again, but it just doesn't make the most sense, and doesn't go down the route I'd love to go down with this project. I was thinking of doing an Echoes project about the history of ByWard market. Not only is it where I work, and thus am often there and have that personal connection, but it's been a centre of Ottawa society and trade for well over a century. However, the research isn't really there for this very specific project and I do want to frame my project in a counter-history and anti-colonial lens wjhich isn't really achievable here.

November 2: I've been reflecting a lot about the geographical game confines of using Echoes for my project. While most games or experiences that students will create in this course are primarily confined by the software itself and the "world" of the game, mine will be confined by the software and physical geography, which comes with its own challenges, and makes presenting hisotrical research in a non-liinear experience tricky. I've even considered doing something similar to what Prof. Graham introduced to us with Echoes, the telling of stories people buried in York Cemetery but with a cemetery in Ottawa, but I really would like to distinguish myself from that use of the software.

November 8: I think I've finally gotten it! I was walking to school reflecting on the almost visceral experience I had in the summer of last year when walking around the memorial at the Centennial Flame for the 215 victims of the Kamloops residential school whose bodies were uncovered. 215 pairs of children's shoes made me feel such sorrow and anger as it was an incredibly visceral way of representing the lives lost, something that the written word simply cannot reproduce, at least for me. I then thought of telling the stories of Residential school victims with Echoes, and dropping those audio clips in the area surrounding the centenial flame. Not in a perfect circle either, as I want to make this as non-linear as possible to make each person's interaction and experience with it unique. 

November 11: I will ask some friends to voice some of the stories I uncover in my research to remove the monotony of my voice for each story. I also plan on looking into software that can recreate human voices to see if they are refined enough to tell these stories in non-robotic fashion. I also want to be very careful with how I tell these stories. As much as possible, I want to avoid any type of paternalist rhetoric (from my perspective as a white man) and I don't want to reduce the children who experienced residential schools to mere victims, while also acknowledging the fact that they were victims of a genocidal system. I've already found a few sources written by Indigenous authors that address these points, and will certainly layer their arguments into my approach here.
- December 1: Prof. Graham's comments --> rethink structure of project. Historical theory? History from below and anti-colonial approach, goes hand in hand with counternarrative and giving voices to individuals of history, not lumping entire group of "victims" into a single homogenous blob devoid of their own experiences and stories. Will also help to avoid falling into the traps of presenting these stories in a paternalistic or victimization fashion, as I am a settler. 
- December 3: I also need to rework which stories I want to tell. I think that focusing solely on the experiences of children to have experienced residential schools confines the issues of systemic racism and colonialism to the past. Sewing these stories together with ones from the present, more recent past, and the past preceding residential schools will present the issues as temporally unconfined. One challenge will be the research process going further back in time, as I want to exclusively use case studies to humanize individuals in an effort to contextualize the reality and extent of the cruelty of colonialism in all of its (temporal) forms. 
- December 4: I've also decided that using AI voices for this project would be a very poor choice, and that sticking with my own voice for most of the echoes is the most authentic way for me to conduct this project, rather than trying to distance myself and my identity from the final product. I do, however, think that alternative auditory things would make for a more interesting project and provide agency to Indigenous people. By this, I mean that using songs, poems, or talks by Indigenous people for some of my echoes would bring added depth and authenticity to the project. I think I was mentally limiting myself too much in terms of the possibilities for this project. With an essay, I'd be thinking about how to paraphrase certain excerpt or if I should use block quotes to maximize authenticity, but here, I can use the primary source material in its original and humanizing form within my own project. It just took me a while to open my mind to the scale of possibilities here, but re-reading the Jennifer Evans article really helped me reflect on the amount of space I have to be creative. 
- December 6: While walking by the Centennial Flame on the way back from work, I realized that it's circular shape will be really helpful in telling these stories in a non-linear fashion, but that it also enables me to make rings of echoes around it. I think that having two rings of echoes, one with 5 that focus on Residential school victims (including those of intergenerational trauma) and one that is not limited in its scope by either institution or time would make for a very interesting experience, especially as it would allow me to overlap echoes from different eras to draw links between them and convey to the listener that they are far more similar than they are different from each other. 

December 8: I played around with the Echoes creator page today to get a sense of how it worked, I know that I put this off for WAY too long, but here we are. Fortunately it's very user friendly and I plopped down some echoes around the centennial flame as a test run, which went well. 

December 9: I've been doing more research for primary source material and I believe that despite focusing on Canada and centring this project around the Centennial Flame, that strictly adhering to the colonial borders of Canada would be unwise. One of my favourite books on Indigenous self-determintation is by Robin Wall Kimmerer, who has lived her whole life on land that is apart of what is internationally recognized as the United States, but her experiences with colonialism don't much differ from those in Canada, and in the end, this is an anti-colonial project, so I think that using a colonial geographic framework to confine it would be deeply ironic.

December 13: I've been struggling with the concept of agency, and how to best provide the voices I want to amplify with a sense of agency, which I just don't think is possible if I use my own voice to tell these stories. So, I'm making a significant shift, which does render much of my research ineligible for the final product of this project. I will only use primary and secondary sources in audio formats, which will then represent the clips I drop around the Flame. Of course, as the curator of this project, and as a settler, true agency for these voices is unachievable, but by centring Indigenous voices and experiences separate from my own literal voice, I believe i come much closer to this semblance of agency, which is very important to me. 

December 16: I wanted to do 15 clips, but I'm reducing that number to 12, which still allows me to double the number of clips focused directly on Residential Schools with other clips about colonial structures, and neo-colonialism specifically. I think that too many voices would lessen the impact of each one and force me to keep each clip shorter than I'd want to do, so this permits more holistic accounts of each perspective.

December 18: Identifying the twelve most diverse, relevant, and moving clips of the 23 I collected, editing them, and uploading them to Echoes went surprisingly painlessly today!

December 19: I went to Parliament Hill to listen to the experience for the first time today and it wasn't quite right. The locations on the map were off by a few feet, which left a few clips right in the flame, which isn't exactly ideal.

December 20: My spatial adjustments of the clips' locations was a tedious process but well worth the effort. They are now far more dispersed than I'd initially intended, but I actually prefer it this way. It encourages more movement, and there is a bit of a searching process to find each clip, even with the help of the map.
